Genpass
=========
A very simple password generator for creating diceware-like pass phrases
(e.g. correct horse battery staple).

DISCLAIMER: Using a diceware wordlist does not make it diceware password.
Diceware specifically prohibits using a computer for creating random data.
Therefore, there does not and cannot exist a computer program that generates
diceware passwords.

THE QUALITY OF PASSWORDS GENERATED BY THIS PROGRAM IS ENTIRELY DEPENDENT ON THE
QUALITY OF YOUR RANDOM NUMBER GENERATOR.

Ok, you already knew that. This program just makes things *easier*.  Chances
are using this program on a computer with a decent `/dev/random` will give you
better passwords than you were using before.  (If not, I take my tinfoil hat 
off to you.:-)


usage:
    genpass [random [wordlist]]

    where 
        `random` is the name of a file containing at least 16 bytes
        of random data (default: /dev/random)
    
        `wordlist` is the name of a file containing one "word" per line.
        It can contain as many words as you like, but they should be 
        unique and reasonably memorable. The default wordlist is the 
        English Diceware word list. 
        (http://world.std.com/~reinhold/diceware.wordlist.asc)
    
genpass will print the raw 16-byte password in base 16 on one line
and the corresponding words from the wordlist on a second line.


Where does genpass fit in the universe?
=======================================

Two things are required for a strong password: it must be unpredictable and it
should be long.  Because human beings are extremely predictable in general, we
should never select our own passwords -- we should follow a procedure that
generates *random* passwords. Because we need to *use* the passwords generated,
another desireable feature is that they should be memorable. Most humans are
bad at remembering long, unpredictable sequences of *characters*, but are
slightly better at memorizing long, unpredictable sequences of *words*. genpass
simply converts the former into the latter.

You should use this program or diceware for passwords that need to be
memorized: e.g. the decryption password for your hard disk, the master password
for your password manager, and the login password for the backup service you
use to store your password manager database.

You should *write it down* on a paper that you keep in your wallet.  You should
practice typing it a few dozen times a day for a few weeks.  After you have it
unforgettably memorized, you *may* destroy the written copy (or put it
somewhere very safe if you don't trust your brain).  Because this memorization
process is fairly intensive, you should probably not try it for more than a
dozen passwords -- the most important and the most frequently used.

The passwords that you don't need to memorize should be stored in your password
manager. If you use Windows or MacOS, I currently am recommending AgileBits'
1Password: the people behind it seem to have their act together and seem to
really care.  For Linux, I am currently using KeepassX.  I also use LastPass,
but I recently learned the hard way to not depend on a non-public file format
for important passwords that you cannot easily recover or reset. (I cannot
confirm that the format is not public, I just haven't found anything about it.)

Is 128 bits enough?
===================

For most people: Yes.  If you disagree with this, you are way smarter than
I am and definitely shouldn't trust the software I write.

TODO
====

* add usage()
* add base-32 output -- harder to memorize/transcribe, accepted by most web logins
* add length option??? 
	-b,--bits BITS   minimum bits of entropy in passphrase
